[Music]
so
hello and welcome to topcast for
an extraordinary episode and by the
title you can probably guess what it's
all about so hence a slightly different
setup i'm in a different place anyway
but i thought the darkness just adds to
the mood of what we're talking about
i'm not using any notes i'm not reading
anything today this is nothing to do
really with the beginning of infinity i
guess it touches on some
small issues there associated with the
beauty infinity but this will just be
me thinking out loud about a particular
topic
now because i'm in this different place
and because i'm not using any notes i
don't actually have to read anything on
the screen today and so i can probably
do away with my glasses also i noticed
that in this particular setup
things are reflecting off these glasses
so i'm going to get rid of them if this
is disconcerting to you because i know
that sometimes seeing people who
normally wear glasses without them can
look a bit strange you can just listen
to the audio i suppose
okay so i'm going to as i say just be
thinking out loud about this particular
issue because it's been coming up on
social media recently and in various
other forums that i sometimes
participate in
and in my own personal life people have
been asking me about it as well my view
happens to be
and so i'm going to take a meandering
walk around the different arguments that
i'm aware of
i don't believe any of these arguments i
don't think that
any of them are things that are able to
constrain
our knowledge on this topic particularly
well
but what i want to do is to present to
you firstly the thing that everybody
knows about this topic
and then to try and present some
alternatives that sometimes people don't
tend to talk about but even these really
interesting alternative perspectives on
this idea
aren't things that i believe and even
though whenever people ask me about them
these other interesting ideas these are
the interesting theories which
purportedly are solutions to this
particular topic
aren't anything that i believe i just
raised them with people because
they're the interesting counterpoints to
what everyone thinks they already know
about the topic
so what do people already think they
know about the topic
the topic being are we alone
is there other life out there in the
universe
and by we i suppose we mean
technologically advanced
or intelligent life like us but perhaps
you just want to interpret we
as any form of life whatsoever now we'll
discuss
both of those but let's begin with what
everyone knows
what everyone knows is the universe is
really really big
really big our galaxy alone contains 200
billion stars billion stars that's with
a b
but some people say it could be as large
as
400 billion stars it could be double
that i don't know but i know it's a big
number and now galaxy of course is just
one of very very many throughout the
universe there could be
200 billion galaxies within our
observable universe and of course the
observable universe is just a part
of a much greater whole in fact the
greater whole could be spatially
infinite we don't know
some people have said some when i say
some people i mean some astronomers have
claimed something like
two trillion galaxies in the observable
universe i don't know
i know it's a big number everyone knows
it's a big number everyone
knows the universe is really really big
what we also know
is that almost all of these stars in all
of these galaxies
have planets and many many of those
planets are going to be
solid like the earth terrestrial planets
and terrestrial planets
are kind of what we're looking for
because that's where you might get
complicated living things we don't know
there could be complicated living things
flying through the clouds of jupiter for
all we know
there could be complicated living things
swimming in the seas
of europa or the ocean of europa which
is one of the moons of jupiter which has
this
icy crust beneath which i think six
kilometers beneath this
is the thickness of this ice beneath
which there is supposedly an
ocean of water which could contain
bacteria or it could contain
fish or whales or who knows
i doubt it but we can talk about that as
well
what we also know and what scientists
are coming to understand really well
is that our previous ideas of the
conditions required in order
to sustain life and to allow it to
thrive
are changing all the time the previously
thought of as barriers to what could
possibly enable life to survive have
been shattered over and again
specifically by these little critters
called extremophiles and an extremophile
is
something that likes extreme conditions
and
we used to think that well a good way to
let's say sterilize something is to boil
it in water
because nothing can survive in boiling
water the dna
denatures itself it's not stable at
really high temperatures
boiling your water is a really good way
to make it safe at least to
kill the cholera out to kill the nasty
bacteria that might otherwise cause you
sickness from drinking impure water you
should boil your water if you
are unsure about its quality but we've
learned
over the last few decades there are
actually archaea a certain kind of
bacteria that is
thermophilic that will survive at 105
110 i think the highest number i've seen
is 130 degrees celsius 30 degrees
celsius
above the boiling point of water and
this little critter
will survive there are other kinds of
critters like criterion main bacteria
or archaea or something simple like that
which can survive at even
lower temperatures lower than the
freezing point of water they will
happily survive in ice that is minus 15
degrees celsius or something
which we normally thought would cause
the
uh cell which is a sphere full of water
to explode or to shutter but now we know
that these
kind of bacteria contain chemicals like
antifreeze which actually
protect them from such extreme
environments so there are these extreme
environments in which life on earth
can survive so we used to think for
example that
the habitable zone the zone around a
star
where life would be able to survive and
thrive was quite narrow but now we think
well
if you can have bacteria or archaea that
are surviving
well above the boiling point of water
well then that might mean that
places that are well above the
temperature of the earth
could still sustain life and places that
are cold might still sustain life if
you're interested in extremophile stuff
look up
archaic or thermophiles and sometimes
complicated creatures
relatively complicated creatures seem to
have this capacity to survive in really
hostile environments as well you can
look up the water bear
or the tardigrade i think it's called
and this thing will happily survive
really high pressures high temperatures
low temperatures high oxygen
environments low oxygen environments
high salt low salt it's really robust so
maybe there's life out there that is
able to survive in these kind of
environments which means
the places that we think that life could
survive out there in the universe around
stars is much much greater so there is
this
circumstellar habitable zone the place
around
a star where a planet should be such the
temperature is
not too hot not too cold but just right
in order to support life
at this point i should of course
interject because lots of people say
well you're only talking about life as
we know it you're only talking about the
kind of life that we're familiar with
well no not necessarily it could be
completely different there might be a
life based on silicon there's lots of
reasons chemically speaking
that we think that silicon for example
isn't a good substitute for carbon it
can't form these really long chains and
rings although it has a
valence of four it seems like it's
similar chemically speaking to silicon
there's a lot of challenges to trying to
create complicated structures out of
silicon
here on earth all you get is silicates
in rocks which are about the most
complicated things that silicon will
produce
you don't get bing log strands big long
molecules like the dna strand made out
of silicon
so it seems like carbon is the way in
which to encode information
in complicated ways in order to produce
the genetic information that you need to
pass on from one generation to the next
carbon seems to be the thing the
physical way in which
life might instantiate its own
information
nevertheless yes of course people can
object to say well
again you're constrained by your own
imagination maybe there are other ways
things you can't even imagine things we
can't even detect and
well if it's something we can't detect
then
we've left the realm of science for now
so we can only talk about the kind of
life
that would be detectable that's what
scientists are interested in doing
there's in finding
it and by definition if something isn't
detectable and if it's something we
can't possibly imagine
then there's no point trying to search
for something
you can't imagine and you can't detect
anyway you know i like to entertain the
idea that maybe there are civilizations
made of dark matter dark matter is the
stuff that we have no way of detecting
except
through its gravitational influence on
other large things out there in space
like
entire galaxies which rotate too fast
for us to assume that all the matter
there is actually luminous matter that
we can detect
in other words c dark matter is
something we cannot see
we cannot see it but we know that it's
there
however we don't know what it's made of
but maybe maybe it can form complicated
structures maybe whatever this dark
matter stuff is
people can be formed out of it whole
civilizations might be here in this room
surrounding us made of dark matter there
might be dark matter people we just have
no way of seeing them no way of
detecting them
that's a scary thought isn't it or is
that a comforting thought to know there
are actually other people there right
beside you
this is completely and utterly the realm
of science fiction and i do not believe
it for a moment
but i'm not saying it's impossible
that's all but that's not saying much
saying that something is
physically possible we just don't know
how okay i've just changed my audio
levels because
listening back to myself i sounded a
little bit distorted so i've turned
things down a little bit hopefully this
is a little bit more comforting to your
ears let's see
um i was saying that these are the
things that people already know
people already know the universe is huge
it contains
hundreds of billions of galaxies and
each of those hundreds of billions of
galaxies contains
hundreds of billions of stars and those
stars have planets around them
and many of them are going to have
conditions which are just right for
the kind of life we find here on earth
even if that life
is extremophile life and can only
survive in hostile environments that
means there's a lot of places
throughout all the galaxies in the
universe to
harbor life to have a place where life
can not only survive
but thrive i'll just throw in one little
additional fact there's not only a
habitable zone around
stars namely the place where we think
water would be not too hot and boil away
and not too cold and just freeze
completely solid
but with liquid we are basically
solutions of a kind you know we are
chemicals dissolved in water as is every
other animal and plant and life form on
earth we are
things that use water as a solvent to
transport around the nutrients that we
need inside of our bodies
so we're looking for water out there or
places at least that
water might be found and once you find
the water maybe you find the life
nearby within it somewhere
there's a caveat to all of this which is
that there is also something called
a galactic habitable zone now if
we cast our minds back to just after the
big bang
there was a very first generation of
stars and of necessity
that first generation of stars must have
been made out of
only hydrogen and helium because that's
pretty much all that was created during
the big bang there's hydrogen helium and
trace amounts of lithium
and maybe the smallest amounts of
beryllium but nothing else
absolutely nothing else now given that
that's the case given that that's the
case that all you've got is basically
hydrogen helium
any stars that form will be made out of
hydrogen helium any planets that form
around those stars would also be made
out of hydrogen helium
which means you won't have the
opportunity for complicated chemistry
you won't have the opportunity for a
terrestrial planet a rocky planet
like the earth and around these first
generation of stars
so if you have metal poor stars
metal poor regions in a galaxy by metal
poor we mean
astronomers mean anything more heavy
more dense
more complicated higher up on the
periodic table than helium
so lithium counts as a metal it is
technically a metal in chemistry anyway
but so too lithium beryllium boron
carbon nitrogen all of these things
metals or non-metals to a chemist are
metals to
an astronomer we just call them metals
okay anything that is
heavier than hydrogen helium so if you
have just hydrogen helium
then you can't have complicated
chemistry because helium doesn't bond
with anything at all doesn't even bond
with itself
and hydrogen in such uh condition can
bond with itself but then you've got the
most complicated thing that you've got
in the universe is
a h2 molecule which isn't particularly
interesting
hydrogen can't bond with helium that
doesn't work chemically either
so you need you need at least the second
generation of stars you need that first
generation made of hydrogen helium to
explode
and to scatter their remnants throughout
the galaxy enriching the interstellar
medium such that you can then
have a planet that is rocky and then on
the rocky planet you might get some
complicated chemistry going
but this leads to the idea of a galactic
habitable zone if you have a first
generation of stars
stars that don't contain any metals
anything more complicated than
helium then you won't have complicated
chemistry but there are certain regions
in the galaxy
where it's metal poor it's so metal poor
in other words there's
so much hydrogen helium and so little of
anything else on the periodic table
that scientists think that you won't get
terrestrial planets in those parts of
the galaxy and so you can map parts of
the galaxy to find out
using spectroscopy how much metals are
in certain parts and i think in many of
these
many galaxies that we see out there
there could be a galactic habitable zone
far away from the central bulge of a i
think of a um
a spiral galaxy um that there are metal
paw
regions around in galaxies and there
might be metal poor
entire galaxies as well so not all the
galaxies might actually be capable
after all of creating um or generating
sustaining
complex life let alone intelligent life
but that said
we're going to ignore that complication
for the fact for the
for this particular argument this
argument that everybody knows this
argument that the universe is
so huge so implacably vast that
it has to be teeming with life it has to
be there's just
so many planets don't you realize the
number is astronomical it's literally
astronomical how many planets are out
there well
someone a famous astronomer on twitter
ethan seagull i think his name is
um he's got a number lots of people have
got numbers you ask an astronomer
they'll give you a number about how many
planets are out there in the galaxy out
there in the universe
ethan seagal has 10 to the power of 25
there okay so that's his number
that's a huge number that's a huge
number and so now let's just do the
thought experiment that everyone kind of
does
if even only one percent or less than
that
a fraction of a percent of those planets
out there
had some bacteria then you only need a
fraction of percent of those planets
that have the bacteria
to evolve into complicated life forms
and you will absolutely certainly have
millions upon millions of advanced
civilizations out there somewhere you
only need the tinus percentage
it's simple maths to do 10 to the power
of 25 planets a tiny fraction of those
can involve life and a tiny fraction of
those will evolve into intelligent life
and you still
have a vast vast number of places where
intelligent civilizations will arise
this is the argument that we all know
but apparently the first person to come
up with this argument to think of this
argument
uh get to name this argument and that
was enrico
fermi enrico fermi the physicist
i've never understood why he gets to be
called named after him because i'm sure
a lot of other people have thought
precisely the same thing but so the
story goes fermi the physicist was
sitting there
at a coffee table or a lunch table or
something with his colleagues
and they're discussing exactly this
they're discussing this kind of question
and fermi asks the classic question
in response to all of the facts that i
just laid out there although it would
have been
back in the day when fermi was around
talking about this so he wouldn't have
known exactly what we know now in terms
of
number of stars in the galaxy number of
galaxies within the universe
the proportion of stars that contain
planets i think it's almost all of them
um he didn't know all of these facts but
he had certainly an understanding
certainly a reasonable understanding
that the universe is vast and because
the universe is vast it's got to contain
a life there somewhere and some of that
life has to have evolved
into intelligent life and so fermi asked
where are they well where are they where
are all of these civilizations and that
is where the
interesting arguments come now
and lots of people have advanced
arguments over the years and so i've
just given you the argument that
everyone kind of knows that they should
be out there somewhere
now if you believe most science fiction
movies what they're doing is they're
hiding
they're hiding um and if you're
interested in ufos if you're one of
these people who like joe rogan is
extreme
is just fascinated by the possibility
that there are these things like
tic tacs out there if you've been
looking at that conspiracy theory
recently that
um that the the the
navy or the air force in america has
tracked these things called tic tacs
and these tic tacs apparently show
technology that is
just incompatible with anything we have
right now and people are
very very impressed by what they've seen
because
these are air force pilots and this is
the military actually
admitting the american military
admitting that they have something there
that they cannot explain
and i am with neil degrasse tyson on
this that in a sense
in a sense that's where the conversation
stops until you have
far better evidence you need far better
evidence it's
a ufo perhaps but the u stands for
unidentified we don't know what it is
but to leap from it's something we don't
know
we don't know what it is it's
unidentified two it's an
alien that's crossed the galaxy using
technology that's far beyond ours and
they've used
warp drives and they've gone through
wormholes and who knows what
it's too much of a leap it's too much of
a leap there
all things being equal something more
simple
is probably going to be the answer
is is going to be a better explanation
is going to be a better explanation
i'll give you one experimental
military technology which the u.s
government
absolutely does not want anyone to know
anything about
and so even if their own pilots in the
navy who
uh don't have the sufficient clearance
to know about this stuff
uh discover it they're not going to
admit to it but they don't want to
appear to be covering it up either so
they're willing to publish something and
to say yes we found this thing and we
can't explain it
but they might very well be able to
explain this they don't want to tell
anyone so who knows who knows there
could be
secret military technology out there it
could simply be
here's a here's a is a possibility it
could be military technology
that tricks other advanced military
technology
so if you look at this video of this tic
tac
of this ufo this flying saucer type
thing it's not a flying saucer as such
but it's apparently alien technology
maybe it's something that's designed
specifically
to confuse bemuse upset
the systems and the pilot of
a navy or an air force fighter jet maybe
that's
specifically what it's for to distract
them because that's a pretty good
defense mechanism i mean if the
the the the enemy air force has
decided to invade you if you can hit a
button and some sort of technology
dazzles their eyes and causes them to
hallucinate and to think that they're
seeing ufos that's pretty cool
that would put them off trying to bomb
you while they
they run away from the alien okay
whatever the case i'm not really
interested in pursuing the details of
that particular example
just to say that are the aliens trying
to hide from us it appears as though
they don't want to be seen
in either case they're not doing very
well by the way if it is the case they
don't want to be seen
they keep on being they keep on being
seen they keep on being spotted by us
primitive humans using our simple
cameras and always in poor resolution as
well
whatever the case they're not doing well
or they want to be seen
they want to be captured on a film in
which case they're not doing
particularly well because
they're not just landing in times square
or in trafalgar square or
in sydney harbour somewhere okay if they
want to be seen then
they could easily be seen if they wanted
to be seen if they wanted to hide and
they have such
advanced technology surely they could
hide better than what they have been
hiding
i really do not think that we've been
visited though so that that's that's my
cards on the table i think that um
that that what that thus far what people
have
brought forward in saying that this is
evidence of
alien technology alien life is
very very poor okay it does not reach
the threshold
that i think could cause anyone to say
oh yes absolutely that is
evidence of alien intelligence of some
kind
however we might still think we might
still think that the
answer to fermi's paradox fermi's
question where are they
is that they are hiding now they might
be hiding because
concerned they're concerned about being
detected by other
even more advanced life forms which
could be hostile which could be hostile
and so aren't we stupid we
silly humans are sitting there
transmitting our radio broadcasts out
there like a beacon
allowing everyone to know that we're
here and we shouldn't be we should be
hiding like the aliens are hiding the
aliens are hiding from each other
because they know
that not only is the universe a hostile
place and not really
and not really friendly with all its
black holes and all of its
supernovas going off and all of the
cosmic events that could cause the
destruction of their civilization
but there are other alien civilizations
out there that might take over their own
civilization
let's just do away with this one really
really quickly
the argument here is precisely well it's
a very similar argument to the concern
about
robots taking over the world right that
artificial intelligence is going to get
so advanced
that it's going to turn into this
terminator type thing and it's going to
want to wipe us all out
now i think in both cases the
robots are going to take over the world
they're going to want to kill us all
destroy us all find out that we're
useless and we're in the way of their
advancing technology and their advancing
knowledge and we are just slow
useless humans that need to be
exterminated
and the aliens who if only they could
detect us would come down
and exterminate the surface of the
planet because they would think that
we're evil or they would not to take
over our resources something like that
i guess here is the beginning of
infinity
style response to that the beginning of
infinity style response to that
which i would endorse is that in both
cases the robots
that are going to take over and the
aliens
which are going to take over the aliens
by the way that have
flown across the galaxy or across the
universe using technology
far beyond our capabilities right now
and the robots which are able to think
so much faster in both cases they've
made a lot of progress
they've made a huge amount of progress a
vast amount of progress
at rates possibly faster than we are
making
our progress so they're thinking better
than us
certainly on the topic of technology end
in science
now if we just stick with the aliens for
a moment how is it that they've been
able to make such
progress in science and technology well
there's only one way there's only one
way
to have a fully open society a critical
society
a society that resembles ours only
better
in many ways it's certainly better
technologically which means it must be
better
mathematically and scientifically it
must also be the case that it's better
politically
because the progress that it's been able
to make and sustain
over so many years possibly millions of
years maybe billions of years unlikely
to be billions but let's say
millions of years this is a society that
is super advanced
maybe it's a society that's only a
thousand years ahead of us we can get
back to that
but i think it would have to be millions
of years ahead of us okay to be a
remarkable coincidence if it's within
sort of a thousand years either side of
how it where our society is right now in
terms of its technology and knowledge
more than likely if we detect an
advanced civilization out there it's not
going to be
at exactly the same point in evolution
and technology and progress that we are
at
it won't be a long time behind us
because we'll have no means of detecting
it
if it's many you know centuries behind
us it only needs to be
actually one century or so behind us and
we won't be able to detect it because
there won't be
radio signals being put out by that
particular
society that particular technology so
more than likely it's going to be a
million years ahead of us something like
that and then we'll be able to detect it
or then they could visit us anyway
if such a society is out there if such
an alien
civilization is out there and they're
coming to visit us
they're not going to want to exterminate
us if they're making progress in science
and technology and of necessity politics
politically
in order to sustain an environment where
they can make
this rapid progress
over time that is stable without
destroying themselves
they will have advanced morality they
won't be
looking to exterminate us they will be
better at us
in every domain mathematically
scientifically
technologically and morally morally
they'll be more advanced than what we
are
they will understand compassion in a way
that we can barely comprehend
they are not going to start
exterminating species randomly
we're already at the point where almost
all of us understand
that all humans are equal that we are
all the same it doesn't matter
what your race background ethnicity is
so we've already made that progress
now we're kind of making a kind of
people would say it's a kind of progress
where we're taking into account our
circle of concerns our circle of
compassion
is expanding out beyond just humans into
other animals and people are very
concerned about other animals
this is what we're doing this is what we
human beings as pathetic
ignorant human beings so far behind
these advanced aliens
this is the way we're going and that is
progress that really is progress
increasing the amount of concern
kindness and compassion
for others not being completely callous
in the way in which we treat
other life forms so
would an advanced alien civilization act
just like the supposed conquistadors did
in the past
would they be tribal in the way that
humans used to be
people often bring up the conquistadors
in this won't the aliens be just like
that they will see us just like the
conquistadors of spain saw the inca of
south america
they will take them over they will
either bring disease or wipe them out
deliberately through violence
and i think this is completely incorrect
if we
human beings of the year 2021 were to
find an incan civilization somewhere
hitherto
undiscovered would we go in and destroy
them would that be what we do
we do exactly the opposite by the way we
already know there are tribes there in
the amazon
and people are not more advanced people
are not going in there
or if they did in so far as we do we go
into help we try and bring them medicine
we try and bring them technology
i think it's actually wrong when we take
a step back and say let's not interfere
i think that's actually wrong because
i think many of those people at times
would if they could
have access to the kind of technology
that we have they would if they could
cure the diseases that their children
are suffering when their children get
sick
or start dying of cancer we should want
to help them
none of us want to go in there and
exterminate them with machine guns no
one has that
but apparently that's what people think
about super advanced aliens
the super advanced aliens aren't going
to be super advanced in their morality
they're going to be super backward in
their morality they're going to be
acting like
genghis khan or something so they've
increased their knowledge in
every single domain possible except
morality
and i think this is a strict
contradiction i don't think such an
alien life form
could actually ever become
technologically advanced because the
precondition
for doing science is an open society
it's being open to criticism
and understanding that everyone has
their own ideas
that everyone should be able to
criticize each other's ideas that
a another creature that's able to
communicate another creature that is
intelligent might have an idea
that would be useful and this is the
only way you can advance technologically
and scientifically so therefore you need
a morality
that takes into account what a person is
and the value that a person can provide
it doesn't matter if that person
thinks a little bit more slowly or that
person can't remember quite as much as
what you can
the person might nonetheless come up
with an idea it doesn't matter who they
are
they can come up with an idea that could
improve your own ideas
the aliens will understand that the
aliens will understand that in fact the
animals will understand that a lot
better than us
and also we can dispense with the what's
this the star trek idea the the prime
maxim or whatever it's called i can't
remember
you know that that the people in in the
star trek
ship they were not to interfere don't
interfere
um with alien life that you come across
and i just think that that wouldn't
happen either
for the same reason that the problem of
evil hasn't been solved in theology if
you've got an all-powerful god
an all-knowing god then it makes no
sense
that he's also an all-good god because
it was all good
and he was all-knowing then he would
know about the suffering that's going to
happen tomorrow
that when the tsunami happens and kills
40 000 innocent infant children
there is no good to come of that there
is no good to come of that
the only good that could possibly come
of that is that people then create the
knowledge of
ensuring that that never happens again
but was it worth it for those 40
000 children to have died wouldn't it
have been better if god had have come
down and just made sure that
they didn't get killed so no one in
theology has ever managed to
properly solve this problem of evil that
evil natural disasters happen that
people have no control over
which cause untold amounts of suffering
and that if god if god existed
then god should have done something to
prevent that sort of catastrophe
and this is why it causes some people to
go well that kind of god
mustn't exist can't exist it's
incompatible it's illogical it's
strictly illogical
so too with the aliens then super
advanced aliens would have an
ethic surely would have an ethic that
when they look down at the earth if
they've seen the earth
would see all of the suffering that they
could
help to solve by bringing their
knowledge if not their resources
certainly their knowledge to the human
race to help us
to help us to advance so that we can
cure disease
to prevent earthquakes to stop
hurricanes in their tracks to travel to
other planets to survive in
intergalactic space
who knows what but an alien civilization
that's super super advanced
and who looked on and did nothing
would have to be super evil but then we
get back
to the whole problem of such a super
evil alien wouldn't have been able to
make the kind of rapid progress
needed to travel across the galaxy
and it wouldn't have been able to
sustain over such a long period of time
that kind of progress without destroying
its own members in some way
because that's the only way that such an
evil
kind of idea of allowing people to die
who otherwise
didn't need to or allowing people to
suffer who otherwise didn't need to if
only they had your knowledge
that kind of alien couldn't have existed
and survived and thrived for so long
so that's that but still i'm still
circling fermi's paradox and the things
that
many people kind of already know these
things about the fact that the universe
is extremely large
and therefore you know with 10 to the
power of 25 planets
even if only a small fraction of them
could actually sustain life and even a
fairly small fraction of those actually
did go on to have life on them and even
if
only a small fraction of those went on
to evolve intelligent life there should
still be
countless numbers of civilizations out
there
where are they okay
here's the other answer that i find far
more interesting than any of that
and i'm going to credit uh a lecturer of
mine a past lecture of mine charlie
lineweaver here's his webpage i've
mentioned him before on my
other podcasts i find him wonderfully
prolific
and diverse in his interests here's a
sample of his
papers here and he's talked about he's
written papers on the rapid
biogenesis on earth which is an
interesting
kind of constraint on what we know about
how life evolved
here on planet earth and here on planet
earth
it seems as though as soon as the
conditions were right
life appeared because when the earth
first formed something like 4.52 billion
years ago
it was a pretty hostile place molten
rock it had a
reducing atmosphere in other words there
was no oxygen anywhere
just completely sterile probably no
liquid water stuff like that but
it cooled down over time and once it was
cool enough
to have liquid water pretty much the
geological evidence seems to suggest
life appeared but what was that early
life like well it was
bacteria archaea of a kind now
that archaea that very simple bacteria
is a thermophilic bacteria so it makes
sense when we talk about thermophiles
the first life on earth would have
formed as soon as the earth was cool
enough but still really hot
still really hot okay so it would have
been near boiling point and so these
very
first life forms probably evolved in an
environment where there was
very hot liquid water and no oxygen
but managed to survive in that terribly
hostile environment
then what happened next what happened
next well the earth continued to cool
but for approximately the next
two billion years something like 1.9
billion years
nothing happened nothing much of
consequence happened
1.9 billion years the bacteria didn't
evolve to anything complicated
they remained bacteria they remained
single-celled organisms
it was 600 million years ago 600 million
years ago
that the first complicated life arose
and evolved
sim very simple multicellular life we're
not talking dinosaurs
not talking humans we're not talking
frogs we're talking
microscopic life for the most part
so that was 600 million years ago for
the first
1.9 2 billion years of life on earth
there was bacteria
so the bacteria didn't evolve into
anything complicated
so what does this suggest it suggests
that
given the opportunity bacteria by and
large
don't evolve into more complicated
things they remain bacteria
the reasons why the bacteria became more
complicated
evolved into something that was
multicellular
rather than unicellular it's it's a
topic of discussion and an open question
in science still no one knows
no one knows and by the way once we get
that multicellular
organism we still don't have an animal
we don't have anything like a koala or a
dog or a bird or a fish anything like
that now we have to wait even longer
for that to appear and we went through
phases of
where the the the surface of the planet
was covered in trilobites
the trilobites came and they went they
disappeared again
but they weren't particularly
complicated how long would we have to
wait if we populated a planet with
trilobites
for them to evolve into making radio
telescopes
okay so charlie lineweaver you know
wrote this paper
with tamara davis i think another
astronomer in australia
talking about this fact okay the rapid
biogenesis that happened on earth the
rapidity
how quickly the bacteria appeared on the
earth
can tell us something about life and the
rest of the universe
that perhaps it's the case that as soon
as the conditions are right somewhere as
soon as a planet is
reasonably cool as soon as the planet
has some water on its surface
you'll get life you'll get life this is
a promising thing
if you're interested in there being life
out there in the universe this seems to
suggest
and we've only got one data point of
course the earth so it doesn't tell us
much it's not really science we've got
one data point but you know this is the
best we can do we've got a kind of a
problem in that we have on earth a
situation where it appears as though
life arose very quickly as soon as the
conditions were right so it doesn't seem
like
it's that hard for life to arise but
i've made this point in another
podcast as well that we haven't on the
other hand here on the other hand
there's a set of experiments called the
miliuri experiments the mili uri
experiments are absolutely fascinating i
first started i think 1952
something like that going from memory
and miller and uri they
essentially the idea was you take a
flask you put all the chemicals that you
think
the early earth had all the inanimate
chemicals
carbon dioxide maybe some oxygen
nitrogen
and you have this soup ammonia water
you put it all into a flask put a cap on
the flask and then you send some
electricity
through the flask and you shine some
lights out at ultraviolet light and then
try and replicate what the sun is like
the electricity you're supposed to
replicate what the lightning is does
and then you leave it for a month a year
and you see what's in the flask at the
end of that time
milan and uri of course had high hopes i
think
that maybe something would have crawled
out of the flask well not exactly but
maybe they would have made bacteria
what they made were amino acids and this
was very exciting at the time at the
time everyone went well amino acids
that's pretty cool
we started off with just these really
simple molecules
of you know maybe some carbon dioxide
and oxygen
hydrogen water and
nitrogen and what we get at the end of
it is an amino acid which is a building
block of a protein
which can go into becoming a nucleic
acid which can become dna and that's
life
so it seems like we're on the road we're
on the road maybe if we left the flask a
little bit longer we would get proteins
we would get proteins and maybe left a
little bit longer we could get nucleic
acids and then we'd have a cell
this was the story of course making
amino acids
it does not really put us on the path of
making complicated life or if making any
life at all
making amino acids is kind of like
walking along a road
and seeing a pile of bricks and
expecting that the next thing that you
will see
along that road is an opera house or a
skyscraper now depending upon where you
are perhaps yes you might indeed think
that
but if you're seeing very simple bricks
it might be an indication of
perhaps a house coming up but really
you don't have anything to go on you're
just extrapolating from what you think
is the necessary logical progression
of these things but there is nothing in
science which suggests that once you're
you've got amino acids you will
definitely then get proteins
that this is necessarily what's going to
happen and we've also found
since the miliuri experiments that amino
acids are really really common
throughout the entire universe we can
find them using spectroscopy
in clouds of nebula out there in the
galaxy so
amino acids are kind of they are
necessary building blocks
yes they're a part of life so far as we
can tell but
we haven't found complicated proteins
and i don't think that even the repeats
of mila yuri's experiments the modern
day
analogues of these experiments where we
have tried to replicate
conditions such that they are far more
bio-friendly than the
original ones that miller and uri did
miller and uri didn't really know what
the early earth was like now we have a
better
idea better understanding i don't think
any of those have produced much fruit
either
so here we have two competing ideas on
the one hand
the miliuri experiments seem to suggest
it's hard to make life out of inanimate
chemicals
and on the other hand we have the line
weaver type stuff who says
well statistically speaking it looks as
though
life appeared on earth really really
soon and so maybe this gives us some
clue
as to how soon it would appear on other
planets as well so
the line of everyone says life might be
more common than what we think
but the milieury one says life might not
be that common at all because it appears
too hard to make complicated
chemicals now i'm going to come back to
line weaver
later on but i'll just interject with
another name here and that's peter
slissack i
credit him with this argument and the
argument goes
like this earlier on we were talking
about the
sheer number of planets in the universe
an
absolutely astronomical number
astronomical
well i want to present you with a number
that will
completely blow out of the water this
astronomical number
that will make this astronomical number
seem like a pittance
in comparison and here's the way we're
going to do it
we're going to consider evolution
evolution by natural selection
now a little quick lesson on evolution
there are things called convergent
features of evolution
and a convergent feature of evolution is
something that
keeps cropping up in
life forms that evolve independently of
one another
let's consider the wing
the wing existed in insects long ago
it evolved and it has spread throughout
the insect world
lots of insects have wings independently
it evolved in dinosaurs there were
winged dinosaurs
and independently again there were
winged birds
and also certain mammals have wings as
well which evolved
independently of others so
wings are things that just seem to keep
appearing
in life forms throughout the geologic
fossil record so lots of species have
have had wings
it's a useful feature evolutionists
found this is a solution
there's a niche there or a niche in
order for these
winged creatures to fill and survive
and thrive wings are useful wings are a
convergent feature of evolution
how often has intelligence arisen
intelligence of
the humankind the creative kind the
in david deutsch's words the ability to
create explanations kind the universal
explainer kind
well it seems as though here on earth
it arose once it arose once
not independently in many different ways
now it might be the case
that they're coexisted with homo sapiens
other kinds of hominoids which were also
intelligent
but i want to suggest that all of these
intelligent hominoids if
indeed there were multiples side by side
and it seems as though there were
had a common ancestor there was a first
universal explainer there was a first
human being
type creature who was a creative thinker
who was different to the ones that went
before there was a
discrete change in the genetics in some
way
which took whatever the creature was
that didn't have this
creative capacity to create generate
explanations
into one that could whatever it was like
slightly before that
i don't know i'm conjecturing but i
imagine there was a common ancestor
of these intelligent creative
thinking species and we are the sole
descendant of that creature we are the
sole descendant homo sapiens that exist
today
are the only living extant
representative
of this particular species so there's
one kind
there's one kind i think it's not like
the wing it's not like the eye this
creative brain appears to have only
appeared
once it's not a convergent feature of
evolution
and in fact the experiment was done the
experiment was done and
other people have observed this other
people have observed this but lineweaver
talks about and various other people who
have talked about how
well the experiment the natural
experiment was run here on earth
by which i mean 200 million years ago i
think approximately
the continents were separated so
europe asia was quite separate to africa
completely separate to australia
separate to north and south america
so these are kind of like experiments
natural experiments let's
populate them with living things and
let's see what happens well
up there in europe you have some badges
evolving and squirrels and over in
asia you have some lions and tigers and
in north america you have some bears and
in south america you have some
jaguars and other critters getting about
australia we have kangaroos only in one
place
africa did humans evolve
did humans evolve and they evolved the
capacity
very quickly to well not very quickly as
we've talked about they
have static societies but they evolved
the capacity
to have complicated civilizations and
that included the ability to study
astronomy
and to listen out for radio signals from
outer space using radio telescopes
so that kind of creative capacity to
build technology and so on and so forth
evolved once in africa so the thought
experiment is
left alone how long would it take for
the creatures in north and south america
to evolve into
this kind of creature that could do such
a thing leaving a bear alone
for as long as you like a brown bear is
it going to start to build
an engineering company is it going to
start to
write down euclid's elements or poetry
no what about in australia when are the
kangaroos going to involve
evolve some intelligence well they won't
this is the fallacy of
intelligent design evolution or
lamarckism evolution does not have
sight it cannot see ahead to
try and aim for a particular thing and
it doesn't appear
given blind evolution which is what we
actually have that
there is any sense in which intelligence
is a real niche
that it is a thing that creatures evolve
towards
now we have it but we are just looking
backwards from ourselves
and we are looking back from ourselves
and going well clearly everything has
evolved to us we're the pinnacle
but lineweaver makes the point by the
way this is called the
encephalization quotient which is the
the
the size of your brain relative to the
rest of your body and we have a really
big brain relative to the rest of the
size of our body
and so we look back uh in the evolution
that has led to us the line the lineage
that we follow
and see that as we go backwards the
brains get smaller and the bodies get
bigger
and we are the pinnacle of that and so
everything appears to have led to us
wine weaver makes the very salient
argument that
well an african elephant could do the
same but with their trunk the
nasalization quotient
because from the african elephant's
point of view looking backwards
trunks got ever shorter in the past in
the fossil record
and so it appears as though evolution
has been aiming for
an ever longer trunk so too with
giraffes
ever longer necks everything that exists
now every extant
species that exists right now can do the
same thing can look back
and trace the evolutionary lineage that
led
to them at the pinnacle but that is just
a false way of looking at evolution
evolution is blind it's not aiming for
anything in particular
everything is kind of an accident that
happens to fit in a particular
environment
and unlike the wing so for example
birds might very well look back and go
well everything's been aiming towards
something that can fly
that would be a stronger argument
because at least then it can point to
other species that also fly why because
it's convergent feature evolution
and lots of different species lots of
different classes of animals
and creatures have the capacity to fly
but none of them except for us have the
capacity to think in the way that we do
so we shouldn't expect that evolution
leads to
intelligent life that's the line weaver
part of the argument now
peter slisak who's an academic at the
university of new south wales
uh a philosopher more than a physicist
he he had he had something to kind of
add to this to really constrain
it and to really pull any hope that you
had
that there might be intelligent life out
there from under you
and again i just want to emphasize i
don't believe any of these things i
don't
know what the truth is i just want to in
this episode
present to you some of the novel
interesting arguments that maybe you
haven't heard before
and here's slesak's argument and i
love it to tell you the truth because
it's a criticism i don't believe it i
just say it's a it's a criticism
of that argument that i began the entire
episode with that argument
about astronomical numbers 10 to the
power of 25 planets
10 or sorry a 1 followed by 25 zeros
that's the number of planets
in the universe that's phenomenal an
astronomical number well here's the
number that's going to blow that out of
the water absolutely blow that out of
the water
make that number appear as a pittance
a a tiny number by comparison
here's how we do it here's the thought
experiment
imagine that you're a human being and
you're looking back
at all the steps in evolutionary terms
that have led to the human being how
many would there be
we all started all species that exist on
earth now
started from that first single
celled life form that bacteria or rkr
that very
microscopic thing single celled
that existed billions of years ago
and for which for billions of years
didn't change by the way so far as we
can tell
how many steps are there between
evolutionary steps discrete evolutionary
changes in the dna
from that first bacteria single-celled
thing
to human beings you know this single
cell thing it's
it's it's it's evolving from the single
cell thing into the the multi-cellular
thing into some sort of fish thing
you've seen the pictures you know and
then it becomes like a
a fish thing that's got legs like some
sort of amphibian the amphibian thing
becomes like a reptile sort of thing and
the reptile
becomes a rat and then the rat thing
becomes
like a monkey thing which becomes more
upright and eventually get to a human
this occurs over
billions of years billions of years this
takes
how many discrete steps is there
millions thousands
okay let's be really really really
conservative let's say
and this is obviously fantasy talk but
let's say there's only a hundred
let's say there's only 100 such steps
completely unrealistic there's way more
than that but for the purpose of my
argument
i want to make the number as small as
possible because i said i'm going to
generate a really big number here so i'm
going to
present you the smallest possible big
number
let's say there's only 100. now each of
those steps
that led to us that necessarily led to
us
each of those steps that led to us that
didn't have to lead to us
but led to us necessarily was required
in order to lead to us but we can get
back to that
what chance does any one of those steps
have of occurring
it could have occurred or not you know
the the the lizard
thing didn't have to turn into the rat
thing or the fish didn't have to turn
into the the fish with legs that could
survive in
an atmosphere rather than in the ocean
maybe each of those steps has like a one
in a million chance of happening
maybe one in a thousand chance let's be
conservative let's be really generous
let's say
any of those steps had a one in ten
chance of happening
it's a pretty high probability now
what we have is this situation let's say
we've got those 100 steps
and each of those 100 steps has a 1 in
10 chance of occurring
well that means that for any two of them
in a row that would be one in ten
times one in ten chance of occurring a
one and a one hundred chance of
occurring for both of them
to happen consecutively in just the
right order to lead to a
human being the only species that we
know of on the face of the planet
that has the capacity for creative
thought or
leading to the common ancestor that we
had
with other intelligent species that
existed on the planet
there was this first universal
explaining this first
creatively thinking human being
let's say there's a hundred steps each
of those steps has a one in ten chance
of occurring
then what we have the mathematics works
out like this
it's one in ten times one in ten times
one in ten it's one in ten
times one in ten a hundred times or one
in ten
to the power of a hundred now
you don't have to know much math to know
that this is
one over ten to the power of a hundred
one over one followed by a hundred and
one
zeros a hundred and one zeros
now we can see this number completely
destroys
that ten to the power of 25. so anyone
who's talking about the astronomically
large number of planets that's out there
and the astronomically large number of
places that life could be
if we seeded every single one of those
planets every single one of them
with bacteria like we were seeded with
for one of another word a few billion
years ago here on earth
and even if we made every single one of
those planets really
friendly bio-friendly gave it the right
conditions lots of oxygen lots of water
oceans wind lightning sun
of just the right temperature even if we
made all the planets like that
there would be no chance if this
sequence of events was unique if this
sequence events
was unique that it should be replicated
out there anywhere
at all now many people might say and
this is a reasonable criticism of this
is that there could be various ways
various evolutionary paths that could
lead to a human being
that could live but again that raises
the question of convergent evolution if
there were these
multiple ways of arriving at
intelligent creative thinking people
then we should have seen other examples
of that arise independently here on
earth
but again how long would we have to have
waited
in australia for it to have evolved
people the most complicated creatures
that existed here in australia
five million years ago were kangaroos
and some wombats
possums if we left them isolated
as an experiment for another million
10 million 100 million billion years
does anyone expect that those creatures
will evolve into something
creative intelligent and able to send
radio signals and perhaps travel across
the galaxy
there's no reason to think that there's
no reason to think that because
evolution doesn't work that way
that if the conditions are right those
creatures will just remain
the same you need selection pressure for
evolution to really
to cause diversity to take advantage of
variation
and of course that that can happen
around the universe but
there's no reason to presume that there
is this intelligent
niche and and what lineweaver calls this
is the
planet of the apes hypothesis the planet
of the apes hypothesis
that when you take away the human beings
out of the situation that there is this
niche left behind there's this
place for animals to evolve into because
there's nothing filling that particular
nation so
the kangaroos will actually evolve into
people because in the planet of the apes
the premise of the movie is
the human beings are wiped out for
whatever reason
and years later it is discovered
by is it time travelers i can't remember
other human beings from the future or
something
um anyway the the the apes the great
apes the chimpanzees the orangutans
they they evolve into people
they become fully functioning creative
people that have technology and
civilization just like human beings do
in other words
there is an arrow to evolution that
darwinian blind evolution will take a
great ape and turn it into
a person left long enough if left long
enough
this is just a misconception it's a
misconception about how evolution works
and so
lineweaver's point is and so is slesak's
point
that an answer to the fermi paradox
is we're utterly alone that the
mathematics
on the one hand doesn't make any sense
there simply aren't enough planets the
universe isn't big enough
to ensure that evolution is going to
lead to
complicated life forms because it only
happened here on earth once there have
been
countless millions of species 99.9 of
which have gone completely extinct
none of which showed any sign of
creative intelligence like us
except for our common ancestor okay and
those other species that
we evolved from so i'm really interested
here in the common ancestor
that was the first species that was able
to
you know create explanations because
that that first
creative explainer that first universal
explainer whatever it was whatever
species that was
it makes perfect sense to me that that
first species would split into other
species because they would have been
as we know tribal and they would have
separated from one another moved around
africa into separate places
moved up to asia whatever they moved
around
they got away from one another and they
were separated for a sufficient amount
of time
such that they evolved into a separate
species this is the way speciation
occurs okay all you need to do is to
separate the tribes for long enough
and you will have different species and
i imagine that really primitive people
would have done exactly that ending up
with different species of humans
and then eventually one of the species
humans
comes along and the humans managed to
win the race in survival for whatever
reason whatever the case
whatever the case we're the only ones
left we're the only
extant universal explainers the other
ones that existed
have long since gone extinct but again
i'm just emphasizing the point that i
think all of those
other species that were like us or had
the capacity to think like us to do art
like us to do
thinking like us create explanations
like us be creative like us
they came from the same place they came
from the same
universal original universal explainer
so that's it they're the things that i
wanted to say
today about that particular issue the
argument that everyone already knows
about the astronomically large universe
that we live in with the astronomically
large number of planets that's in it
to be countered by this idea that the
biologically large
number of
small probable small probability that
there is
of any line any any
any sequence of events in evolutionary
terms leading to a person
is so exceedingly small that biological
number completely
blows the astronomical one out of the
water the biological number is far
bigger than the astronomical one we
should say when you've got a really huge
number
that number's not astronomical that's
biological that's how
unlikely that thing is to occur or
that's how amazingly vast that thing
happens to be how big that number
happens to be
now do i believe any of this again i
think i'm saying this for about the
fourth time
no i don't believe any of it i don't
believe
that we are alone in the universe i just
don't know
i don't believe the universe is teeming
with life we just don't know
i don't think that the aliens are
terribly hostile and are coming after us
because i think that if they make
progress in science then they'll make
progress across all the domains
across everywhere of necessity knowledge
is this unified whole
you can't hold one area of knowledge
completely static making no progress
whatsoever while all the other kinds
you make progress in okay that makes no
sense whatsoever it's especially true of
morality because morality is kind of the
the underpinnings the conditions in
which a society
either flourishes or doesn't and if the
morality isn't right
and therefore the politics isn't right
the civilization won't be right
and you won't have this open-ended
stream of knowledge creation
possible you won't be possible you'll
have censorship
and violence you'll have an uncaring
disregard for other life forms
both your neighbors and other species
but that's not the story here on earth
we know already
that people are converging they are
converging on
moral truth in the same way we're
converging on scientific truth and every
other kind of truth
so are there aliens out there no one
knows
i don't believe any of this but i think
it's very useful to have in your toolkit
of discussion when you're because these
discussions are interesting
these discussions can cause creativity
in one's own mind about the
possibilities
but i think it's important to have these
in the toolkit it's not enough to just
say
well the government has got a conspiracy
and they're not telling us about the
islands they found i think that's
i think that's ridiculous but that's a
topic for another time but
the simple argument that
the universe is just so vast there must
be aliens out there i think is
has got a good criticism a couple of
good criticisms against it
which themselves can be criticized i
admit that fully and i haven't dealt
with
the criticism that exists out there i've
mentioned this book before on the
podcast it's called
rare earth by ward and brownlee an
absolutely
brilliant book that goes into even more
of the details
about what happened here on earth in
order
that complicated life including
ourselves
arose all of the very strange
happen chance occurrences that happened
that that make this story of well the
universe is just so vast there has to be
a vast number of
civilizations out there make that story
seem
to be lacking in hope at times but there
are counters to this okay there are all
sorts of counters
that one might make namely we don't know
everything about how evolution works we
we know some of it we don't know
everything so it very well may be the
case that there is
a mechanism whereby
evolution leads to increasing complexity
in ways that we don't quite
understand and there's a certain kind of
complexity ours this creative complexity
where providence or something else that
we don't fully understand yet
causes the laws of physics to be such
that
universal explainers are a kind of
structure in the universe
that the universe is built for in a
sense
i don't believe that either okay i don't
believe any of this i keep on saying it
it's
just different ways of approaching this
interesting issue
so i'll leave it there for now i'll have
another episode out
soon but for now see you next time
i do hope you enjoyed that discussion
this has just been me
free form completely ranting and talking
about something that's of interest to me
and of interest to
i know many people who follow me and
many people who i talk to
in real life about this stuff as well so
i thought i'd just put it into one nice
little condensed form
so that it was here for posterity
until next episode which should be out
very soon as well
look out for that one see you bye
[Music]
you